# Contemporary Issues In Data: The Privacy Problem in Big Data Analytics

In this document, I will discuss two articles with opposing viewpoints on the debate surrounding the issue of privacy in the big data analytics industry.

## Article 1
WACC's article, [Big Data Analytics and the Right to Privacy](https://waccglobal.org/big-data-analytics-and-the-right-to-privacy/), talks about how user data is collected, used and shared without transparency and/or anonymity. Such data might be used for the benefit of society but that does not change the fact that it remains discriminatory against some individuals and groups. Moreover, despite there being laws in place that mandate anonymization of personal data, it has become increasingly simple to reverse identify such anonnymous data. For example, DNA sequences shared over internet can be used to identify subjects, or location-based data can be used to identify individuals. This aspect of big data has many people engaging in increasing self-censorship in order to protect their privacy.

I believe the article highlights important issues that arise from the proliferation of big data analytics. There does exist a certain space for discriminatory decisions to be made by using data collected from people across the world and power dynamics certainly tip in the favor of already much too powerful entities such as governments to do as they please with this data. However, the well-meaning solution proposed by the article that calls for greater transparency on the part of organizations that collect this data as to the how, why, what and who (what is collected, how it is collected, what is it used for and who has access to it), is complicated at the least. The intent for the use of the data can be changed over time in light of other advances, such transparency can harm the company in the competitive big data market, every possible outcome can not be predicted, etc. The concept of privacy and all that it entails, itself becomes blurred when talking in a technological context. What is considered private information? What if the analysis of such information can help in the grander scheme of humanity? Nevertheless, this debate does not seem to be nearing any kind of conclusion any time soon, as a "solution" to the privacy problem in big data is not as simple as one may think.

## Article 2
Jeremy Owens' article, [The Debate Around Data Privacy is Missing the Point](https://towardsdatascience.com/the-debate-around-data-privacy-is-missing-the-point-1fcdc4effa40), published in Medium is quite thought-provoking. The article argues against the fight for data privacy. It talks about how the solutions proposed for this problem, such as anonymization, commodotization and minimization, are not feasible. This debate usually ignores the perception that this privacy loss is actually more of a trade off by providing a different kind of privacy. Technology helps make your personal life generally more hidden from prying eyes and the data that is collected in the process is mostly used for the advancement and betterment of society. For example, a survey concluded that people were more willing for allowing the use of facial recognition software and surveillance cameras if they were to be used for increased safety of the general public. Therefore, the article argues that we should be willing to sacrifice a little bit of our individual privacy in order for better security and benefit for the collective.

The article manages to get its point across in clear, concise and convincing language. We are too concerned for our individual selves, to the point of being selfish, that we ignore how big data analytics can help humanity in the longer run. For example, analysis of medical records can accelerate cancer research or categorically unusual google searches can uncover threats to public safety. I believe it is time we shift the spotlight from trying to preserve privacy of user information to trying to prevent breaches of such information so that it does not fall into the wrong hands. In the right hands, this information can be used to make our future that much better. We need to start thinking in terms of the whole of humanity rather than the individual, so that we may move towards goals more lofty than ourselves. Of course, we can not prevent people from self-censorship, but if our refusal to share our data hinders important research that can help improve security in general, does that not fall under skewed morality? Once again, we can observe that nothing in this debate is black or white, and we only need to reach a consensus as to how to navigate these grey waters.